By now many if not most of you have heard of the book
and now the film "The Way of the Peaceful Warrior".
It's a somewhat fictionalized portrayal of the journey
of a young man from his material success in life
turn to tragedy and then his rebirth
into a wiser way of living
learned from a mystical old man.
This was in fact the personal of odyssey of Dan Millman.
Since then he has written more than a dozen books
based on the principles of his teacher
known to him as Socrates.
We met with Dan and talked about everything from the path
to becoming a peaceful warrior
to the beauty of the small moment
as taught to him by Socrates
while he was practicing for a gymnastic competition.
I think the big question for myself and a lot of viewers
having read your book many years ago, the original book,
is where was this weaving the truth in
who is Socrates
and where was artistic license taken?
Just in the points that you would find
to be particularly relevant?
And I'll just let you go on that one
because I know you've heard these questions many times.
Well, it's never quite the same,
and every answer is slightly different too
in the sense that there is a very long story
about how the book developed into a movie,
adapting a book to film
is like turning painting into a sculpture,
changes have to be made.
So people would ask me over time, you know,
was there really a Socrates, the old man you met
at the gas station, played by Nick Nolte in the film,
and how much of the book was true.
So let's deal with that first, just the book.
That's what I would prefer to deal with, yes.
Sure.
Well, the book is a blend of fact and fiction,
that's the simplest way to put it.
Socrates was absolutely real,
Dan Millman, however, is a fictional character.
(both laugh)
No, I really did meet an old man about three in the morning
in a gas station, and he didn't jump up on a roof top
that wasn't really what kept me there,
it was a good literary device to get my attention,
to get my readers' attention.
But actually it was more like a wander in the forest
in India centuries ago came upon the Buddha.
And he didn't know who was
but the wanderer was fascinated by this personage
and he kept following him, and finally got the nerve
to walk up and approach him, and he said,
to the Buddha and he said, "Are you a wizard?"
And the Buddha said, "No."
And he said, "Well, are you a king or a warrior?"
And he said, "Well, what is it that makes you different
"from anyone I've ever met?"
And the Buddha smiled and said, "Oh, I am awake."
And that's what struck me about this old guy,
there was something about him, a twinkle in the eye,
the way he carried himself, the way he breathed.
He had something that I wanted that I didn't have
and I didn't know what it was, I couldn't articulate it,
like so many of us.
There's something we're looking for
more that news, weather and sports,
but we can't articulate it.
A bigger picture of life, the transcendant
is what the yearning is for,
but how many people would articulate that
before they discover it.
So he kept me around the gas station,
and so I did meet a real old man,
I did shatter my leg in a motorcycle accident,
much of the story, the structure of it is autobiographical.
But I wove in with elements of imagination,
the journey, the inner journeys and so on,
to convey some remiders for living
we all know deeper levels but we tend to forget.
And did your relationship then continue
with this man that you met?
Our relationship with Socrates was not as long
as it indicated in the book.
From the time I met him in 1966, winter of 1966,
to the time I wrote the book 14 years passed,
and so during that time I met other mentors,
I traveled around the world, had other experiences,
so I conveyed he was a voice for all that I learned in my life
to that time
but he was a cosmical guy, he wasn't just based
on an old mechanic.
When I met him he really had something.
So in your real life what was it
that he was able to impart with you,
your first infusion from,
Well, first of all, the character in the book,
the character in the movie was a rather cocky young man
who had the world in the palm of his hands,
who was going to the Nationals, Internationals
and really had it made okay.
So from that position as a young man
what was it he infused into you
however brief the time was together
that really started the journey?
Well, I can answer that in two separate parts.
The first part is yes, I was indeed successful
in the context of a college career:
top athlete, had a girlfriend, grades were good.
So life was good, and yet despite that
something felt missing, and I think that's why so many people
related to the story
because some people who are successful in business,
relationships and many other areas of life,
they had money, whatever, and they go,
they still feel that yearning, that missing piece.
Is that all there is?
Is that all there is.
Right.
And so I think that opened me up.
When I met this old guy, because I'd passed that station
hundreds of times and so many people had,
and all they saw was this old guy,
thanks for the gas, and left.
But at that moment I was open to something.
and there's a saying in the spiritual traditions
that even a glimpse at a spiritual master,
I'm not saying Socrates was a spiritual master,
but even a glimpse one can carry the rest of one's life
because things are communicated
at a subconscious level, body to body,
spirit to spirit.
That even though you may have a brief contact
certain things are communicated,
it's like they quicken seeds inside of us
and they sprout in their own time.
So that's, I know it sounds a bit cosmic but that's,
I can't give you anything more concrete
other than conveyed in the book in the conversations
where he would poke fun at me
he had to shake me up a little bit.
Did he do that for real?
Yeah, yeah, that first night even.
You know, he just didn't act like anybody I'd known,
and so that I was looking for unconventional people,
I've always gravitated towards the weirdos of the world
because I felt like one myself.
even though I look very conventional, still do and did then.
I'm pretty wild inside, not a conventional mind,
and in my new book "Wisdom of the Peaceful Warrior"
I wrote after 25 years after "Way of the Peaceful Warrior"
to really clarify the lessons in that first book
from a viewpoint of some evolution and maturation
25 years later.
so important.
So I do cover that arena as well
and other questions like that
but that's why he impressed me.
And you wrote a book following that
some time later, we have right in front of this,
The Journey of Socrates.
Yes.
And this is maybe loosely, or not so loosely,
based on his life as you came to know him?
Well, it was generated by questions over the years
about, "Dan, you never mentioned in your book,
"in your first book, in "Way of the Peaceful Warrior"
"about this old guy, was he married?
"Did he have kids?
"Who were his teachers?
"How did he become this cosmic, powerful, enigmatical man?"
And I didn't really have all the details
so it does say "fiction" on the back
of the Journeys of Socrates
which I gave by the way in manuscript form
to Nick Nolte before he played the role
so he could have a sense of back story.
the depth, the pains he'd gone through
in growing up in his ordeal,
his Odyssey.
Nick said it was really helpful for playing that role.
So I wrote the book to explain,
to tell his story,
a very different life than mine, you know, middle class,
upbringing, relatively easy life.
We all have traumas, emotionally we've all had physical,
emotional and mental pain in our life,
we've all grown wiser and stronger and more compassionate
because of it.
That's why I say we're all peaceful warriors in training.
But his life was extraordinary in its difficulty,
in its adversity.
He grew up Russia, born 1872, his name was Sergey Ivanov,
and the story tells how a boy became a man,
why a man became a warrior,
but also how warrior found peace
which is I think the most important part of the book
because it explains how to finally break those cycles
of retribution and revenge, even when one is justified
in taking revenge to stop the tribalism
we have in the world today
one group fighting another group,
and as soon as one person is killed on one side
two get killed on the other side in revenge.
And so the book has a larger theme
in terms of how we can break that
and finally say "Enough".
I was going to say the same thing
you just said it so relevant at this very moment in time.
It's always relevant but it seems as though we're
on the brink of something and that story
is particularly relevant right now.
Yeah, and it will be, I mean, I,
my goal, subconscious goal really,
I never strategically set out to write the books I did.
If I had, if I wanted to be a successful author,
I would have found some good characters
and done mystery novels.
Everyone would be like the last yet different,
and the readers who read one would read the next
and the next, but every one of my books suprised me.
It made no sense, the first one I wrote, Peaceful Warrior,
10 years later, I didn't write a book for 10 years,
because I had nothing new to say,
which I think is rather refreshing.
Mhm.
And then 10 years later, a new mentor, new teacher,
new influence in my life and I had all this information
pouring in.
So I wrote Sacred Journey of the Peaceful Warrior.
Which wasn't a sequel, it doesn't start after,
it takes place within the original story.
Mhm.
And then 20 years later I wrote Journeys of Socrates
which is the prequal, takes place many many years
before the story and explains about my mentor.
And meanwhile, I wrote books with many titles,
A Life You Were Born To Live, No Ordinary Moments,
The Laws of Spirit, each one very different
from the other books because it's another piece
of the puzzle, another part of the map.
So I don't write books just to write a book,
or just to clone the book I did before.
Mhm.
Just really briefly, going back to when you started
this whole journey--
Mhm.
As you said, you were rather brash
and successful and you had your view of the world
as a young man has--
Sure.
Looking back on that,
or even at the time when you started really undertsanding
who this other man was, what his journey had been,
did it make you almost cringe to think
of how you had been earlier, even though of course
we are all what we are until we have an influence to change.
Oh absolutely, Regina.
When I write a draft of a book, my first draft,
Ernest Hemingway said the first draft of anything is crap.
And when I write a draft, there's that creative process,
you fall in love with your own words,
you love the creativity that's coming out,
characters appearing and whatever.
But if you're a good writer, if you're fortunate,
you put it aside for a while and when you look at it again,
you go oh my god, that's awful,
and that's good.
Because you made a jump of awareness
and you can begin to rewrite.
That's what I love doing is rewriting and improving.
And the third draft is better, and the fourth draft
is better and polished.
So it's the same way looking back on our lives,
of course if we look back on our teenage years
how kind we were and respectful to our parents,
bit of irony there,
we can look back and go oh, what was I thinking.
How little we knew.
Exactly, exactly.
And maybe there are people who say,
no it was all fine, they're either enlightened
or unconscious.
So of course we look back on our lives
and mistakes and I couldn't count the number
of mistakes I've made but because I was a gymnast,
all I did was made mistakes until I learned
what I was going to learn.
So it was a natural process for me,
of making errors, learning from them and moving on.
Mhm.
And you were so lucky to have this guide.
And what's wonderful is that you've shared your journey,
obviously though all of these various books
and one that I picked up recently, because I wanted to look
at your take on a scientific, hands-on version,
since we don't all have a Socrates appearing
in the middle of the night at a gas station,
nor an extraordinary life where these incredible events
occurred and you overcame these incredible obstacles,
yourself, physically and finding your way on your path.
We don't all have that, so we all need guidence
and even if we only need a reminder, we still need guidence
but many of us need flat out, how do we start from A
and figure ourselves out--
Sure, where do we start from here?
Where do we start from here?
And it seems like you've... first you tell me
before I ask you about this one book,
which of the books that you've written
do you feel is the wonderful, lets start here.
Most people read Way of the Peaceful Warrior first
because it's an introduction to my work.
And it's the one that people get inspired by
and get that feeling, a flavor,
for the Peaceful Warrior's way.
But to really understand what does it mean
to live as a Peaceful Warrior, what is that term,
how can you be peaceful and a warrior,
all those question, I explain,
well after Sacred Journey, people started saying,
well I was inspired by your first two books Dan,
but how do you apply this stuff to daily life?
So I wrote No Ordinary Moments,
a Peaceful Warrior's guide to daily life.
And then I explained the three selves, how that works,
how we're made up of these three,
it's a model of reality to understand ourselves
and went into more explanation of what a Peaceful Warrior is
which I might as well share now,
for those who aren't familiar with my work.
The best way I can put it is,
all of us are Peaceful Warriors in training.
Because planet Earth is not necessarily
the easiest realm.
We have gravity, friction and death here.
We lose all we love eventually.
Every one of us have had pain in our lives
and we've grown for it.
Every adversity has a hidden gift.
In fact the adversities of our lives I see
as a form of spiritual weight lifting,
to strengthen our spirits.
We don't have to pretend to like it,
but when it happens, it's good to have that thread
of understanding.
So all of us are Peaceful Warriors striving to live
with a peaceful heart but a warrior spirit.
Because it takes courage to live in this world,
it takes courage to love in this world,
because when you love someone, when you have children,
your nerve endings are out there
and you're gonna suffer loss.
Every time they skin their knee, for children.
Or if a loved one dies or has a difficulty.
So it takes courage to do that,
and those who don't want to suffer any of that
they can just live alone in a little trailer somewhere
and never have to go through that
but they miss an aspect of life.
Now I'm not saying everyone should have children
or everyone should get married.
But everything we do in life takes courage
and if we look at our lives, many of us say
oh I lived a middle class life, my life's been easy,
it's not like Dan I didn't shatter my leg
or Socrates, I won't even go into what he had to deal
with in his life
Well we'll find out
in a little bit, yes.
Yeah, yeah.
But still, all of us, if we can appreciate
what we've gone through, the emotional pain
the mental pain.
You know Mark Twain once said, I've had many troubles
in my life, most of which never happened.
Right, I love that quote.
Yeah because most of it's in the past and future
and our imagination and our memory.
But in the present moment, we can deal
with the present moment.
So every one of us is a Peaceful Warrior in training.
And I'll go into that more later when I talk
about A Warrior's Spirit.
Okay, and also, the whole notion
of the small moments.
Off camera before we began the interview,
I was talking about so many years ago having read
the first book, I remember this one little scene
about a simple little meal preparation,
the way the vegetables were perfectly sliced
and perfectly presented and that stuck with me,
is the artistry of the small moment.
Where does the beauty in each small moment
feed into, The Way of the Peaceful Warrior.
Well the book and the movie made much
about living in the present moment.
Though many people aren't terribly clear on how to do that.
In my longer seminars, we go into how to do that
because there's time to develop that
but simply put, let me just tell you a story
because all we have is a little moment,
this one and the next one, life is a series of moments.
And I often say, I've never met an intelligent person,
I've only met people who have more intelligent moments.
There are moments of enlightenment,
moments of callousness, moments of ignorance,
moments of awakeness,
and what we can do as individuals is to number
those moments in our lives through practice.
And speaking of practice, I was in the gymnasium one night,
and Socrates came in and was watching me
and I did some big dismount off the high bar,
full twisting double summersalt, whatever,
but I stuck my landing, which is a good thing
in gymnastics.
And I went yes!
Then the workout was over, so I ripped off my sweatshirt
and threw it in my bag and we were waling down the hallway
afterwards and he said you know Dan,
that last move you did was really sloppy.
And I went, I don't get it,
like so many of the things he said, I didn't get it.
It just stopped my mind and he said
oh I'm not talking about the dismount you did,
I'm talking about the way you ripped off your sweatshirt
and threw it in your bag.
And his point was that I was treating one moment as special
going around the horizontal bar,
I was treating another moment
as ordinary, taking off my sweatshirt.
And that's when he said, and I got this line into the movie
at the last minute, that's when he said Dan,
the difference between us is you practice gymnastics
I practice everything.
And there's a difference between doing something
and practicing something.
Most of us are doing things all day.
But the moment we change that, to rather than just
doing it, just doing the dishes,
instead of practicing doing the dishes.
Practice is doing something consciously to improve,
each time you do it, over time, to improve.
Breathing, refinement of movement,
improve the quality,
and to me if there's one essential practice
of a Peaceful Warrior, it's practicing each moment.
Every time we sign our name, to see if we can do it
a little more smoothly and gracefully.
Every time we walk into the supermarket,
pick up something, see if we can do it more gracefully.
Like doing Tai Chi all through life.
And that practice changes the quality of the moment,
it immerses us, it brings us back to the present.
So...
And just being mindful in the moment,
actually even in the film, I thought it was done quite well.
Mhm.
When you had to utilize that
in your practice on the rings, right?
Oh no it was on the vault--
On the pommel horse.
I thought that was absolutely beautiful.
In the film, the expression of all those around you,
and how it inspired them not knowing why,
and so have you been able to in essence,
make your life a practice as Socrates did?
Yes. Absolutely.
Now, do I forget a lot?
Yes, I do.
People have asked me Dan, you wrote a book called
Everyday Enlightenment,
the Twelve Gateways to Personal Growth,
have you mastered all those gateways yourself?
And the answer is no,
but I'm sincerely practicing in all those areas.
If I weren't, I'd have no business writing about it.
And if someone watched me, it might be a little boring
watching me morning til night, they'd probably see
I'm not a perfect example, but I think a good example
of all that I teach.
And so it gets better over time, like any practice.
There is a,
excuse me, I have a little frog in my throat,
there is a really gentle,
loving focus you feel
in your presence.
I think it really exemplifies all the practice
you've done throughout your life.
You walk very softly, you're very clear,
you're very considerate, you hear other people out,
whether we're saying something, particularly intriguing
or not but I really feel that sense of attention
to the moment that awareness that you've developed,
I just wanted to say that on camera, it's very evident,
being around you that you've developed this.
And I have to say in my sense of authenticity,
anyone can do it for a camera interview
or for a few minutes if you have guests over.
And yes more of the time I do live this way,
from practice, but I forget to.
So people need to be gentle with themselves.
So many people beat themselves up because
they measure themselves against some idealized image.
There's so many idealized notions
in the spiritual realm today.
I often ask people when I'm in a seminar,
would ya'll raise your hand if you've read a book
on positive thinking.
And lots of hands go up.
And then I say please keep your hands up
if you've only had positive thoughts for say the last week,
all the hands go down.
And of course those people assume,
well if I'd read the book twice, if I highlighted it
and really done all the exercises, then I too
could be thinking positively.
But they think it's their failure.
People teach the most outrageous things
in spiritual teachings today.
Just focus and visualize and you can manifest anything
you wish, well I found I have to work for it.
That's what I found.
Thomas Edison said most people miss opportunity
because it's dressed in overalls and looks like work.
Now I found work is an action, taking action is
an important step in the process,
rather than magical thinking.
But it's very appealing to people because so many
of us and I say this with great compassion, really,
but so many of us who say I'm interested in enlightenment,
in spiritual growth, what we really are looking for
is a way to feel good more of the time and feel bad
less of the time.
And so we find whatever we can to do that,
and spirituality for many, the fascinations represent
a way to do that.
I don't know, I've heard enlightenment described many
different ways and I have a variety of ways myself
because it's only something you can point to,
it can't be described in words.
It's much simpler than people imagine.
And deeper and wilder,
but the most interesting definition I've heard is,
it is having the psyche alternate between
being the heights of ecstasy and the depths of despair
alternating at the speed of light.
Mmm.
It's a deep human state, it's not above human.
It's not beyond them, it's not a way to escape
from the world, it's a way to enter the world completely,
reality as it is, rather than all the extras we place
on top of it.
Because we all look at the life through a window,
a dirty window, a muddy window of our associations,
beliefs, opinions...
All those filters.
Yeah the filters.
So some people are extreme in that way
and you say hello to them and they go,
what did you mean by that?
Because they're not hearing what you're saying.
All those meanings they attach to it.
So once one gets clear that the zen term of suchness
or isness, it's simplicity, directness,
and Barbara Rasp, a write once said,
the lesson is simple, the student is complicated.
Very true.
And so simplifying our psyches can simplify
the way we approach life.
So as you're speaking about these extremes,
where does the notion of the more Buddhist middle path
come in, is that more or less what you're saying
or you're saying it's a place we pass through or a place
we more or less should look toward spending our time?
Yeah, interesting question.
I deal with it in a number of different sources.
In my little book, The Laws of Spirit,
the first law in the book, that this ageless woman sage
teaches me in the mountains
is the law of balance.
Now in Way of the Peaceful Warrior,
Socrates got up on his chair and railed against moderation.
He said it's lukewarm tea, the Devil's own brew.
And many people didn't get that because
of the Middle Way, the Buddhist teachings,
all that wisdom, what is he saying?
And that's why, one of the reasons I wrote
Wisdom in the Peaceful Warrior was to explain
all that more thoroughly, and in brief.
He wasn't saying that it's good to be all over the place
and out of balance, of course not.
It's all about balance.
But it's also living a life of passion.
So for example, it's not about always having
the shower water just comfortable.
Sometimes it's good to take a really hot shower
and sometimes a cold shower.
And in that way, it's still a form of balance.
Now if you always took super hot showers,
or always took cold, maybe that's not so balanced.
In the same way it's good to explore being really tired
sometimes and also really resting at other times.
But if people wanna be in the comfort zone all the time,
they live a narrower and narrower life,
pretty soon they don't wanna leave their house,
and everything has to be just so.
By going out and roughing it a little bit,
camping's a wonderful way to remember the difference
between wants and needs.
Right.
Find out what you need.
Shelter, clothing, if I'm cold and food when you're hungry.
The rest is extras, just wants, which is okay.
It's okay to want things, it's part of our human nature.
Yeah, into a real good answer,
thank you for that, because that's one I tend to be
a person more of extremes, it swings a bit
from one side to the other and every now and then
rest in the middle and I've always thought
gee, I need to be more temperate in general
which is probably still true,
but what you say about the Middle Path,
that would seem that it wouldn't give you much impetus
to bounce off of, to grow off of if you're always
in that one predictably steady flow of comfort.
Yeah, not to be there all the time.
And we're not, everybody gets knocked
out of their comfort zone at times.
If they catch a cold, get the flu or have a deadline
at work, whatever it is.
And that's okay, and then we come back
to that balanced place.
Because look the body has homeostatic mechanisms.
If it gets out of balance, we can die.
Right.
So balance is a principle of nature.
Yeah.
But as human beings,
it's passionate to explore extremes now and then
to come back.
For our own growth.
Yeah, sure.
For our own growth and understanding,
and experience.
I taught a knife fighting training for 14 years,
called the Courage Training, using knives
as a method, a metaphor.
We taught people off the street who'd never
done martial arts, in three and a half days,
they learned the equivalent of probably six months
to a year training in most martial arts schools.
In terms of being able to move without thinking,
to think with the whole body,
as Taisen Deshimaru, a Japanese sword master once said,
to think with the whole body and to trust that
rather than just the left brain.
The reason I mention this, it may sound like a tangent,
but in this training, even learning a stance,
even learning a basic stance in the martial arts,
you apply balance.
You don't wanna have the stance too long or too short,
too wide or too narrow, kind of the Goldilocks principle
of martial arts.
Right, right.
So balance certainly is an important thing in life,
the Middle Way, but also to explore
the ranges of human experience.
It makes perfect sense.
One of the books that I was drawn to
and I wanted to ask you about and how you became
aware of that particular science,
is the book The Life You Were Born to Live,
which I thought would be a really good hands on place
for people to go, to look at your typeology so to speak.
And you have it based in the science of numerology.
How were you exposed to numerology initially
and became intrigued with and ultimately convinced
that this has real value.
Well I only mention the word numerology one time
in the book.
Because I am not a numerologist,
and not to disparage numerology,
there are many experts in the field.
But the books I glanced at over the years,
just picked up briefly, looked through,
checked out my numbers and all that,
they seemed a little vague to me.
The soul path, the destiny path, this path, that path,
change your name and change your numbers, but--
Change your name, change your life.
Yeah, right and it seemed like about 40% accurate
in my experience.
So I never had any interest in it,
but then one day, and there's a longer story to this,
I sometimes tell, I met an unusual teacher,
one of the four primary mentors other than Socrates
in my life.
And he revealed in an advance training,
me and about 19 other people,
in Hawaii years ago,
he revealed the essence, the basics, the fundamentals
of this approach, this interpretation of the numbers,
that is different from other numerological systems.
Many numerologists have used my book as a source
because there are,
well, I don't want to tell the long story,
there's a martial arts analogy where people learn things,
not quite right, almost right,
and these interpretations and the way you add up the numbers
and work with them are just more accurate.
So first of all,
he gave me a reading, before I knew about any of this.
And it changed my life.
What was hazy and fuzzy in my life all of the sudden
became clear.
I saw the strengths I had, that I hadn't appreciated fully.
I saw the hurdles I was here to overcome
and he gave me the spiritual laws in order to do that.
It changed my life.
That marks the moment I started teaching publicly.
I was a couch, a gymnast before that,
but I never was a teacher in this field
until that time.
So it really did have a massive influence on my life.
Well when I learned he was teaching an advanced training
and I could learn to do for other people
what he'd done for me, that was really exciting for me.
And he revealed the system in a series of lectures
and I only took twenty pages, small pages, of notes.
But I started working off the notes.
The other people learned it just for themselves,
but I always love to share whatever I learn,
so I started doing readings for relatives and friends.
And they were so amazed by it, you know.
Pretty soon I didn't need the notes anymore,
I'd internalized the information.
So after that I started doing readings for people in person
when I went on travels, I'd make appointments with people.
And it was so impactful for them, where I started I couldn't
do individual readings for everybody,
so I started making audio tapes and I eventually,
the 37 life paths, made these tapes and people
would get their date of birth and I'd send them
the proper tape and I did that for some years.
And it was only after about almost a decade
that I decided it was time to teach other
health professionals and they had to be either
a psychotherapist, a doctor, dentist, body worker,
someone who works with other people,
who can use it in the service of others.
And the training filled up immediately
and I did a second one after that.
But then I decided it was time to write a book,
and that's when I wrote The Life You Were Born to Live.
Now people might say well wait a minute Dan,
this makes no sense, how can you add up the numbers
and your date of birth give you valid, reliable,
accurate information about your core issues
of your life.
Absolutely makes no sense, and yet it works.
Anybody who's seen the book goes holy cow,
It's good.
it's a little scary,
and I did it for my friends, my parents,
very interesting looking up one's parents
or one's children because we don't know our parents
in that way, we think they're just there for us.
But to have lives of their own and life paths of their own,
it's quite interesting.
And the reason I wrote the book was it helps us
to have compassion for ourselves and for other people
to really get insight.
And it's one of the most accessible tools.
Astrology's great, the anagram stuff's interesting,
I won't even get into that, I was trained
by the founder of the origin of all that
before anybody ever heard of it.
But this method, in the life purpose system,
in The Life You Were Born to Live I think
is the most accessible for most people
to get some sudden insights and to validate
what they sort of knew in a funny way
but becomes clear.
And you must have by now, at least,
10s of thousands of responses from people around the world
who've utilized this system.
Yeah, probably almost a million people--
Almost a million people.
worldwide by now, yeah.
Wow.
And yeah it's quite, I get some good responses.
It really is because,
like you say in a lot of the numerology books,
you look at yourself kind of broken down,
a one through a nine and you get an archetype
but this really does go into quite a bit more depth
and you have 37 types.
Right.
Then can you explain that
because just because you're a type
doesn't mean you're a type.
Right, exactly.
This isn't a personality test.
Exactly.
This is really about our life purpose.
There are actually four purposes of life,
I go into again, longer seminars, but this one,
the karmic purpose, the path we're to climb up the mountain
that we're all climbing.
We have different paths that we go up.
Now why 37? Mathematically it just works out.
You add up the numbers of people born
in the 1900s and it comes out there are 37 combinations,
37 different numbers.
But it doesn't mean we're all the same,
because millions of people are working each life path.
If you divide 37 into the population of the planet.
The analogy I draw is if I point to a tree outside,
chances are there's not a single tree on the planet
exactly like that tree,
in the angle of every leaf, stem and branch.
In the same way we're all unique as individuals.
We've had our own genetic heritage,
we have our own life experience.
So every one of us is different and unique.
And yet, I can say some things about regular trees
that apply, that are different from birches,
or aspens or oaks.
In the same way we're working patterns in our life.
And so I don't care how different someone's life looks,
if they are the same birth number,
same life path as someone else,
they have a lot in common.
Yes.
They work it out in different ways, however.
Well it's interesting because
one of the prominent number in mine,
I had seen many, many times through the years
and it's my least favorite number.
Of course, and you mention this because wherever
our challenge is, that's not where we're going to resonate
or be drawn to first.
Right.
Which is usually the area
that could use a better amount of attention
than other areas.
Yes, yes.
If I give the whole seminar, there's so much
you can go into
Yeah, yeah.
in terms of what each number means and so on.
Yeah exactly.
But the purpose, we all know the story
about the six blind men that came on an elephant
and one held the leg and one held the ear
and one held the trunk and they all saw
Right.
different creatures
Tried to describe
the creature.
they felt a different creature.
Well in the same way, depending on which of my books
somebody comes across,
somebody discovers A Life You Were Born to Live first,
they go on Dan Millman, he's a numerologist.
Right.
And somebody else, A Peaceful Warrior,
oh no no, he's an athlete who grew up
and met this old guy,
and No Ordinary Moments, the Laws of Spirit, very different.
But all of them form a comprehensive course in living.
And people who read just Peaceful Warrior,
some of them read it six times.
Mhm.
And I really encourage them, look, you might
be better off reading six of my books once,
because you're gonna get a much more
broad scope of what it means to live
as a Peaceful Warrior and how to do it.
You mentioned Laws of the Spirit
a little bit ago and you said you'd go into that a bit.
Can you do that, at this point?
Sure, sure.
Well first of all, what is spiritual law mean?
Many people use the terms, universal law,
spiritual law, natural law.
The reason it's a law and not just a principle,
an affirism, a saying, is I go into this again...
When I was young, I was a pretty disoriented kid.
If ignorance is bliss, I was ecstatic, you know?
I was like what is this place, what are the rules here?
So I started collecting quotations, it's been a hobby,
a lifelong hobby of mine.
And one day I came across one that said
a penny saved is a penny earned.
That seemed true enough, common sense.
But then I came across another quote that said
nothing ventured, nothing gained.
So you have to take risk too, it's not all about saving.
And then I came across one, you can't teach an old dog
new tricks, but you're never too old to learn.
And other quotes that just contradicted one another.
And so I was getting more confused than ever.
Then I came across a saying, a chain breaks
at its weakest link, and I went yeah, yeah, yeah,
everybody knows that.
But then I thought about it and I went...
I couldn't think of any contradiction.
You take 10,000 chains, you break them,
every one is going to break at its weakest link.
It was the first time I got the idea of what it means
to be a law, it's consistent, you can count on it every time
So also, it's not just chains we're talking about,
we're talking about us.
And everything in the world, breaks at its weakest link.
I know because I've checked.
So it's universal, it applies across every domain,
not just to our relationships but also to our health,
finances, everything.
So by mastering and aligning ourselves
with even one spiritual law which describes reality,
how it works, and the more realistic we get,
the more aligned we are with the laws of nature,
the easier our life goes because we're not struggling
upstream anymore.
We're starting to notice the current of life.
The Law of Surrender is one of the laws in the book,
one of the 12 laws covered.
Which is really about, you know Byron Katie,
wonderful teacher, she talks about that.
Really all her work is about the Law of Surrender,
not fighting reality and learning to make use of it.
Very important point because a lot of people,
a lot of people watching this right now,
a lot of us fight what is, trying to make something better.
Right.
And it doesn't work.
This should be,
that should be,
Instead of dealing
with what is.
my kids should be more mindful.
Right, yeah, dealing with what is.
One analogy I give is, I don't know if
you've ever seen that bumper it says,
if you don't like the way I drive, get off the sidewalk.
Yeah I've seen that.
You know and some people, if a car comes at them
on the sidewalk they have an instant to see it coming
and the first thing in their mind is,
they go, you shouldn't be on the sidewalk
and boom, they get hit.
Yeah.
Somebody else sees it and jumps out of the way.
The car whips by.
That's making use, that's the Law of Surrender.
It's real, it's happening, boom, let's deal with it.
And just turning on a dime.
If someone doesn't get their favorite dessert
at a restaurant, oh well okay, it gives me a chance
to order something new.
Just like that, practicing that.
And growing up, we've become stubborn, you know?
People should be this way.
Should is a big ones, for certain people especially.
Yeah, what about staying flexible
through life?
Just to finish on that
Sure.
those are incorporated
into the Life You Were Born to Live
in with this typology so to speak, it gives you the laws
that you are best working with, basically to help,
well you can say it better than I,
but to help overcome whatever innate challenges
there might be to live to your full potential, right?
I thought you said it very well.
Oh.
Actually, but thank you for reminding me
because one of the most important parts
of The Life You Were Born to Live, the reason it's so thick,
it's a reference book, it has all 37 life paths.
But many people get insight and they go,
oh yes, I'm this way and I'm that way
and I always do this, I always wanna say,
well now that you know that, what are you gonna do about it?
And it gives spiritual laws that help overcome the hurdles
in each individual life path.
So different people have different key laws
that if they really pay attention to, can help
exert the right leverage in their lives,
to work more in the positive.
Mhm.
And less in the negative attributes--
Mhm, I find it very well laid out that way,
very useful.
It's said that a hard write makes an easy read,
and I put a lot of effort into it,
it was a tough book to write.
I don't even know how I did it sometimes.
Yeah I bet, but you did it.
Yeah.
And I highly recommend anybody
watching this to pick up a copy.
While certainly any one of them are wonderful,
my next one is the Journey of Socrates.
I'm very excited to find out more about this man.
And the journey in general through that.
But I just brought up a moment ago,
and you brought up the notion of flexibility
and life is an experiment.
Yes.
And not getting too locked into any one
of these things.
Yeah.
Well the way I would express it,
somebody once said well Dan, there was another teacher
that I kind of resonate with more than you.
I said then you should be following that teacher.
Because there is no best teacher, no best writer,
no best religion, no best martial art, no best cooking style
only the best one for a given individual at a given time.
And so we need to pay attention, what's best for us?
We don't have to find the highest master,
we have to find, not the one sitting on top of the mountain
but maybe the one a few feet ahead of us
who can reach back with a helping hand.
And that changes over time.
Our diet, what's appropriate for us may change over time.
What martial art we enjoy may change over time.
But people get everything like a religion it becomes,
they become fundamentalists.
This is the way.
Because it was the way for them at a given time.
So that's why I haven't talked about my other mentors,
publicly.
And I may eventually write a book about it,
but it's not the time yet.
Because I don't want people thinking, oh wow,
that was Dan's teacher, that would be a great teacher for me
Not necessarily.
So we all have to find our own way and trust our instincts.
And that's why I remind people that I'm not here
for people to trust me, I'm here to help
them trust themselves.
That's really a key principle of the Peaceful Warrior's way.
Not giving away ourselves to someone else,
and I've had experience with that,
again I'll tell that story some day.
But we're really here to, that spark inside of each of us
is guiding us.
And we're not here to become the Buddha,
we're here to become ourselves fully
and therefore find that Buddha nature,
Mhm.
in being ourselves.
Mhm, absolutely.
Yeah.
Beautifully put.
And Joy, you and Joy, ultimately
Been married for 31 years
married 31 years
Get's better all the time.
How do you do that as a couple?
Well, let me answer in this way,
on my website which is peacefulwarrior.com,
I have a blog I started a while ago,
and I said it would be a nice way to share ideas
that come up.
They're not a typical blog where I take a news item
and make some comments on it.
They're little essays that I want to share with people.
And the first one I did was on The Secret,
and I'll move on from there, and other one
I did was on self-defense in the martial arts,
but the most recent one is on relationships.
Can you summarize that blog?
Well, men are from Sears, women are from Nordstroms?
That's pretty good.
My husband and I just had a talk about that,
he said we're really pretty simple, in a lot of ways,
we're very direct.
Well I say at the start of the blog,
that's why I haven't been on the media that much,
people haven't seen me on the national TV shows,
because TV shows, they like experts in a given field.
They like specialists.
They go well are you a relationships expert?
Are you a health expert?
Are you a money expert?
People you see a lot, they're experts in one of these areas.
I'm a very good generalist.
Because I understand spiritual laws
and how they apply to everything.
So I can wax forth and say moderately common sense,
hopefully intelligent things about almost any topic.
Not because I'm an expert on the topics,
but I understand the principles underlying them.
And they don't know what to with that.
Well you're an expert on those principles.
Well, on the principles yes.
You wanna talk about spiritual law, I can talk about those.
Doesn't end up on the Today Show.
No, it doesn't always work on Oprah, you know.
So I wouldn't want to summarize the blog,
people can just access it anytime,
just go in, read about relationships.
A kernel that's worked for you.
Okay well I will tell one story.
I went to a wedding ceremony once, it was quite beautiful.
You see ritual is a way to reach the subconscious
so rituals happen in marriages and in transitions in life,
I value rituals, it's a shamanistic kind of idea.
And the religions use ritual a lot.
Well in this marriage ceremony, each couple walked
with a candle, beautiful, the flame, their own flame,
and then there was another candle there, a third one,
and with each of their flames, they merged their flames
and lit the other candle, which is beautiful.
But then you know what they did?
They blew out their own candle.
And I was like...
Isn't that interesting metaphorically.
It was so sad, never blow out your own candle.
We're here to be together and make that flame
that is we, but we are also individuals, we bring
our own selves into a relationship.
But to just become a we and give ourselves up
to a relationship, that doesn't enrich it
and we're here to become a whole greater than the sum
of the parts, that's what a relationship is.
That's only one of the things, I mean it's kind
of a long one because I had a lot to say on relationships.
But anyway, that was one story.
Well we'll check into it.
Now that we all know it's there, we'll all check into that.
Anything else in summary, you've done so many
works and like you say, you are such a fabulous generalist
with an expertise in the laws underlying them.
Anything as sort of a wrap to this conversation?
The wraps are tough.
You know, like the final thought or comment.
If not, I've got a final question for you
of great importance.
Okay, well, I'd like to respond to your question
Okay, the question of great importance
is, is it true in the movie that you used to be able
to hold beers on your feet while you did handstands?
Ah yes, that's a wonderful way to wrap up.
No, in fact, the movIe only covers the first two thirds
of the book, leaving out the most important part.
But they managed to capture some of the spirit.
And they made gymnasts seem like regular guys,
like football players, you know?
But really that wasn't too accurate and--
It didn't ring true.
No, no, I mean maybe some teams.
I know some teams probably do that.
It was a great stunt, I mean,
but it didn't ring true.
No, I mean we were in the 60's at Berkley, in the 60's.
So we had some--
I know, I've seen--
There were some wild times, but that was part of the times
and mostly we were training and studying,
pretty much...
That's a pretty serious path,
especially when you're trying to make the Nationals.
Yes.
Yeah, and beyond.
And training towards the Olympics.
Exactly.
Yeah.
I would like to ask one question.
Sure.
Talking now, to you at your age,
young people like you at your age,
any final comments as to where they begin, right now?
Thank you for asking that, because I was trying
to think of the other blog I wanted to mention.
I did one on the Trying Twenties.
They call them the Trying Twenties because we try this,
then we try that, and that ties into that idea
that life is an experiment.
No one likes to hear it, but it can take 10 years
to really discover your calling.
People want to get out of college, become a consultant,
whatever, make lots of money right out of school
and it's a time of discovery and exploring who am I?
We have to find where our values, interests and talents
intersect, to find our calling.
And people used to say about me, what's Dan doing this week?
So I think it's important for us to really respect our life
as an experiment, not just the way we eat or exercise,
but the way we live and our work in the world,
a form of service that matches our talents, interests
and values.
So that is what I would say to young people.
The advantage I have over anybody young now,
and they have lots of advantages over me,
but the one I have is, I've been 20, I've been 30,
and 40, and 50.
I can look back and have some perspective.
From a certain point on the mountain,
looking at the bigger picture,
whereas to them, life is right here, right now,
what do I need to do with my life?
And it's important to have patience,
to prepare well, to build a foundation of education.
Find out what you're good at, you know?
Find out what you're good at.
And remember there is more to life than you've been led
to believe and that's what I've hoped to do
through my books, is to remind people
of life's bigger picture and higher promise.
But while we function well in life as well.
Again, head in the clouds, feet on the ground,
peaceful heart, warrior's spirit.
Dan is a real treasure and his books impart widsom
that can truly guide us to a place of peace and power
in our own lives.
I found his book The Life You Were Born To Live
to be particularly helpful in facing our own internal
challenges so that we can get on with it,
without any further excuses.
You can find this book and the others by clicking
on the Amazon link below.
Until next time, thanks for watching,
(calming music)